% !TEX encoding = UTF-8 Unicode
     The  first time     he saw   the     island, Marini     was politely leaning over     the    seats
 on the  left,     adjusting a
 plastic  table before setting a lunch  tray down.   The passenger     had    looked at him several times   as he
 came and went with magazines or  glasses  of whisky; Marini     lingered while he adjusted the table, wondering,
 bored,   if   it    was worth responding to    the passenger s     insistent look,  one     American woman out of many,
 when     in the  blue
 oval of the window appeared the   coast of the island,   the golden strip
 of the beach, the hills  that   rose   toward  the     desolate plateau. Correcting the faulty position of



     the  glass    of    beer, Marini smiled to the     passenger. The Greek islands,  he
 said. Oh, yes,   Greece,  the  American woman  answered with false interest. A bell
     rang briefly,   and    the steward straightened up, without
    removing the professional smile    from his     thin lips. He began     attending to a
 Syrian couple, who ordered  tomato juice, but in



    the tail     of   the    plane he gave  himself a few seconds to look
    down     again; the island was small    and
 solitary, and the Aegean Sea    surrounded     it with an intense blue that
 exalted the curl   of a dazzling     and     kind of petrified white,    which down below  would be

 foam     breaking    against reefs
 and coves.  Marini saw that the   deserted beaches ran north     and   west;
 the rest was  the mountain which   fell
    straight into   the  sea. A rocky and deserted



    island, although  the lead-grey spot    near    the northern beach could be    a house,   perhaps a
 group of primitive houses.    He started opening the  can of   juice,
 and when   he had straightened up the island  had   vanished  from    the window; only    the


  sea was    left, an  endless  green horizon.
     He looked   at his wristwatch   without knowing why;     it was exactly noon.



    Marini   liked being assigned
 to the  Rome-Teheran line. The


     flight was less gloomy   than on  the northern
   lines,  and  the girls seemed happy  to   go to   the Orient or  to
    get     to    know Italy. Four


 days later,     while     he  was helping a  little     boy     who had lost his spoon and was pointing downheartedly
 at his dessert plate, he again   discovered the edge of the island. There   was a    difference of eight
 minutes, but  when    he leaned over to    a window in the tail   he

 had   no doubts; the island had
 an unmistakable  shape, like     a    turtle    whose paws
 were barely out of the water. He looked  at it until they called  for     him,   this time


 sure   that    the lead-grey spot     was a    group of houses;   he managed     to make out
 the lines of some   cultivated fields    that extended    to the  beach.


    During  the stop at Beirut he     looked at the   stewardess   s atlas



 and     wondered if the island wasn t   Horos. The     radio    operator, an indifferent Frenchman,    was surprised
 at     his interest. All    those    islands   look alike. I    ve  been doing    this     route     for two years,
     and   I don t care  a    fig    about them. Yes, show it to me   next  time.  It wasn
  t Horos but Xiros,
 one of    the  many islands on     the fringe of     the   tourist   circuits.    It won   t   last
   five years,  the stewardess said to him while they had     a drink in   Rome. Hurry
 up if you re
 thinking of going,    the hordes will be there any moment now.     Genghis   Cook is
 watching.  But Marini

 kept thinking about the island,
  looking at    it when he remembered or if  there
   was a window    near,     almost always     shrugging his shoulders in the
 end. None    of  it made any


   sense  flying three times a week
 at noon   over Xiros   was as unreal as     dreaming three times a   week
 that he was flying    over   Xiros. Everything was falsified
 in the futile and recurrent   vision;     except, perhaps, the desire to     repeat it,   the
 consulting   of   the wristwatch  before    noon, the brief, pricking contact with
 the dazzling white   band
     at the edge of an   almost black blue, and the    houses where the fishermen would     barely     lift    their eyes
     to follow    the   passage    of that   other  unreality.      The island     was   visible for a few minutes,
   but  the    air was always so   clean, and it  was   outlined by   the sea with
     such a minute cruelty that   the    smallest  details were    implacably adjusted


 to the     memory of  the preceding flight. Eight  or nine weeks later, when they     offered
 him the New York run,     with all its advantages,    Marini thought it was     the chance to end
 that  innocent   and    annoying obsession. In his pocket he had a guide book     in which



 an imprecise geographer with a Levantine name gave  more details about Xiros   than
 was usual. He answered no, hearing himself    as     from a distance, and,     avoiding     the
    shocked     surprise  of  a
 boss and two secretaries, he went to have
 a     bite in the   company s canteen, where Carla   was waiting   for  him.   Carla
 s bewildered disappointment did    not disturb    him; the southern coast
 of Xiros   was uninhabitable,   but
 toward the west remained   traces of a Lydian    or     perhaps Creto-Mycenaean



 colony, and  Professor   Goldmann had found


 two stones   carved with hieroglyphics that
 the fishermen used as piles
 for the small   dock. Carla     s head    ached,     and she     left almost
 immediately;    octopus     was the     principal
 resource for   the handful of   inhabitants, every five  days  a
 boat arrived to load the fish  and
 leave   some provisions    and materials. In the    travel  agency they   told
 him he would  have to charter     a special    boat  from Rynos, or

 perhaps     it would be     possible



   to go   in the   small boat that picked   up the  octopuses,    but Marini could  find  out about this
    only in Rynos, where the agency didn t have an agent. At
 any  rate,   the idea    of spending a     few days on the  island was     just  a plan for
 his June vacation;     in the   weeks that
 followed he     had to replace White on the Tunis   run, and then there


 was a strike, and   Carla went     back  to her    sisters  house in


 Palermo.   Marini went     to live   in a hotel near the   Piazza Navona, where
   there   were secondhand     bookstores;    he    amused himself not very enthusiastically by    looking   for books on     Greece,    and
 from time to   time he leafed    through a  conversation manual. The word   kalimera pleased    him,   and
 he tried  it     out on a redhead in a cabaret; he went     to    bed with


 her, learned     about    her   grandfather in Odos and about

 certain unaccountable sore   throats.   In
 Rome   it rained, in   Beirut Tania
 was always     waiting for     him;     there  were  other stories, always

 relatives or sore throats;    one day it     was


 again   the    Teheran run,  the island at   noon. Marini stayed glued   to the
 window so    long that the new stewardess considered him
 a     poor partner and let him  know how  many

  trays    she     had served. That   night Marini invited
  the stewardess for  dinner  at the  Firouz,     and it
 wasn   t difficult   to


     make    her forgive   him for the  morning s distraction. Lucía advised    him to   have his hair cut American-style;     he
 talked   to her about   Xiros for a   while, but later he realized she



 preferred   the vodka-lime of



 the Hilton. Time passed in



 things like that,   in  infinite trays of food,  each one with the    smile to which
 the passenger had the right. On the  return trips the plane flew over   Xiros     at



 eight     in the morning; the sun

 glared against the larboard    windows, and you could   scarcely see
 the golden turtle; Marini preferred to   wait    for     the noons of the  trip going, knowing that   then he
 could    stay a long     minute against  the  window,  while Lucía    (and   then


 Felisa)     somewhat ironically     took care of


   things.  Once he took    a picture of Xiros, but   it came   out
 blurred; he already    knew some things    about    the island, he     had   underlined
    the rare    mentions in a couple of books.     Felisa
 told him that     the pilots called him the madman of the island, but that    didn t    bother him. Carla
 had   just written that she
 had decided not  to    have    the baby,  and     Marini  sent her two
 weeks  wages     and  thought    that the rest would not
 be   enough for   his vacation. Carla     accepted the money     and     let

    him know     through a friend   that


  she d     probably marry the  dentist
 from     Treviso. Everything    had such little
  importance at noon, on   Mondays     and Thursdays    and Saturdays

  (twice a month   on Sundays).  Everything
 had such little importance  at

 noon,   on Mondays  and Thursdays and
    Saturdays    (twice    a    month  on   Sundays).   As time went on, he



 began to   realize that Felisa was the     only     one who understood him     a little;
 there was a tacit agreement    that    she would take    care
 of     the flight at     noon,



    as    soon as he  stationed himself by the  tail     window.  The island was visible  for

 a     few   minutes, but the air    was always so clean, and it
 was outlined by the     sea with   such a minute    cruelty that


 the   smallest details were implacably  adjusted   to the memory of    the preceding flight: the
 green spot of the headland to the   north, the lead-grey     houses,
 the nets drying on the sand.     When   the   nets     weren
 t there,     Marini felt   as if he     had been robbed, insulted.     He thought of filming     the passage over   the
 island,  to repeat the    image in the hotel,    but    he    preferred



     to save    the money on
 the camera since there was less than a month     left for vacation. He didn     t keep

 a  very    strict account    of the    days; sometimes  it was Tania in  Beirut, sometimes
 Felisa     in Teheran,  almost always     his younger   brother in    Rome,


 all a bit blurred, amiably    easy and


  cordial and  as if replacing



    something    else, filling the     hours



  before or after the flight,   and  during     the flight, everything, too,     was  blurred and easy
 and stupid   until it was time     to    lean toward     the tail
     window,    to feel   the   cold crystal     like  the boundary of an
 aquarium, where the golden   turtle     slowly     moved in   the thick blue.   That day, the
 nets were     clearly sketched     on  the     sand, and   Marini could have
    sworn that the black dot on the left,  at the edge of  the   sea,    was a     fisherman who
 must have been looking at the plane.   Kalimera,     he absurdly
 thought.  It no longer made   any sense to wait. Mario     Merolis would lend     him the money he needed for


    the trip, and in     less than three days he


     would   be in Xiros. With    his lips    against     the  window, he  smiled, thinking that he
   would climb to  the green spot, that   he would  enter   the   sea of the
 northern    coves naked, that
 he would fish   octopuses with  the    men, communicating through
  signs and laughter.   Nothing was difficult once decided a  night train, the first boat, another old
 and dirty     boat, the night on the bridge, close   to     the stars, the taste of anis     and mutton, daybreak
 among   the   islands. He  landed with the  first lights,    and the captain introduced    him to an old man,    probably

 the elder. Klaios took     his left  hand and spoke slowly, looking him     in    the   eyes.   Two
 boys came, and Marini found out     that they  were    Klaios     sons.
 The  captain   of  the small
    boat exhausted his     English: Twenty inhabitants,    octopus,  fish, five    houses, Italian  visitor
 would pay lodging Klaios. The boys  laughed when     Klaios
 discussed     drachmas;   Marini, too, al- ready friends with the     younger boys, watching the   sun   come  up  over


     a sea  not   as dark as     from the air,  a    poor,
 clean room, a pitcher of   water, smell     of sage and tanned hides.
  Nothing was    difficult    once     decided  a night train,
 the first  boat, another old and dirty boat, the   night on   the    bridge,    close  to the  stars, the
 taste of anis  and  mutton,
 daybreak    among     the  islands.  They left  him alone to     go    load the   small

 boat, and after tearing   off his traveling clothes and putting  on bathing    trunks  and
 sandals,    he set out for a walk on the   island. You


 still couldn t see
     anybody; the sun slowly but surely   rose, and   from   the   thickets grew     a
 subtle   smell, slightly acidic, mixing   with the     iodine of the wind. It must  have been  ten when     he reached
 the     northern headland and    recognized
 the largest of     the coves. He   preferred    being alone,
  although he  would have     liked to bathe   at   the     sand beach even better;   the  island impregnated him,  and   he
 enjoyed it with such   intimacy that   he was incapable of thinking or choosing.
 His skin burned  from sun     and wind when
 he undressed to thrust himself  into



   the sea from a rock; the water was cold   and  did   him good.     He    let
 a sly  current  carry   him to the
    entrance  of  a grotto, he returned to    the  open sea, rolled over on    his back,   accepted
 it all in     a  single  act  of conciliation that    was
 also a name for the future. He

   knew without   the slightest doubt that he     would   not leave   the island,  that somehow   he     would stay    forever    on
 the  island.     He managed to imagine his brother,    Felisa, their   faces when   they
 found out  he had stayed to live off
   fishing on    a large solitary   rock. He    had already
 forgotten  them   when     he turned over to swim toward
 the     shore.  The
    sun dried him immediately,    and   he went down toward the houses,
 where two astonished women  looked  at


 him before    running inside and closing their  doors. He    waved a greeting in the void and walked
    down     toward the nets. One
 of Klaios  sons
 was waiting for him on
  the beach, and Marini    pointed to the  sea,  inviting    him. The boy
 hesitated,   pointing to     his cloth pants and red shirt.    Then he ran toward one  of the houses  and
 came   back     almost  naked; they dived
 together into an   already lukewarm sea, dazzling under    the     eleven



 o clock     sun.     It  wouldn   t   be easy   to  kill
 the former man, but  there
 up high,   tense with sun and    space, he     felt the enterprise was   possible. Drying himself in
     the  sand,   Ionas     began  to name things. Kalimera,       Marini said, and
 the     boy doubled over   with laughter. Then Marini
 repeated the  new sentences, teaching Ionas  Italian words. Almost    on the horizon the small boat  grew smaller and  smaller;
 Marini felt that now he    was really     alone on the island with Klaios    and his   people. He
 would let     some days pass,     he    would pay for his room  and learn to fish; some afternoon,   when
  they were well   acquainted,    he would talk  to them    about  staying
 and working with  them. Getting up, he held out his hand
 to    Ionas and started walking slowly toward

 the hill. The slope was steep, and he savored

 each pause,   turning   around   time and   again
 to look at  the nets   on the beach, the figures    of the  women speaking  gaily to Ionas and
 Klaios and     looking at    him askance,   laughing. When he    reached the
 green   spot   he entered a world where the smell    of   thyme
  and sage were one   with the  fire  of the sun and the    sea breeze. Marini


 looked at his  wristwatch    and   then, with     an impatient gesture,     put    it in   the
 pocket of his bathing     trunks. It wouldn t  be easy
 to kill the     former man,  but   there up high,   tense with sun and space,
  he felt  the  enterprise was possible. He was in Xiros, he was     there where he
 had so often doubted he could  reach.
     He     let himself fall  back among the hot stones, he endured
     their edges and inflamed ridges    and looked vertically at the sky; far  away he could hear the  hum    of
    an engine.  Closing his  eyes, he told
  himself he wouldn t    look     at
     the plane; he wouldn t let    himself
     be contaminated by the worst of    him that once more was



 going to pass over the


   island.   But in the
 shadows of  his   eyelids he    imagined Felisa   with the trays, in that very moment distributing
  the trays,     and     his replacement, perhaps     Giorgio
 or someone  new from another line, someone who would also be
 smiling  as he   served  the wine or  the coffee. Unable    to fight against     all that past
 he opened his eyes  and sat up, and in     the
 same  moment saw the  right    wing of  the   plane, almost  over   his    head,
 tilt unaccountably,     the     changed sound of
  the jet engines, the almost
 vertical drop into    the
   sea.     He rushed     down the
 hill,    knocking against rocks and  lacerating his arm    among thorns.    The island
 hid the place   of  the   fall
  from him,   but he
 turned     before reaching the    beach and
 through a  predictable shortcut he     passed     the    first ridge
 of the hill and came     out
 onto the     smaller beach.    The   plane s tail     was sinking some    100 yards
  away,  in    total silence. Marini  ran and dived   into    the
 water,     still waiting for the


 plane to come     up to float; but
   all   you could  see was     the
  soft     line of the
 waves, a   cardboard box bobbing
     absurdly near the place of the fall, and almost at the    end, when it  no
  longer made   sense to keep swimming,  a    hand out   of     the     water, just for
     a second, enough time     for Marini    to change    direction   and    dive    under  to     catch
  by     his    hair   the man  who struggled to hold on to him  and     hoarsely  swallowed     air     that Marini
 let him breathe without getting too close.  Towing him   little by little he got him to
 the shore,   took   the body     dressed  in    white in his   arms, and laying him
     on the sand he looked    at the face full    of


  foam where death     had     already settled, bleeding through
 an     enormous    gash in    his throat. What good was artificial    respiration    if, with

   each convulsion, the gash seemed to open a  little



   more and   was like a repugnant   mouth that called to Marini, tore     him   from


 his little    happiness    of such few    hours   on    the island,   shouted to    him between
 torrents   something he was    no longer  able    to hear? Klaios    sons  came     running  and behind  them    the     women.
   When Klaios arrived, the boys gathered    around the body     lying

 on    the sand,  unable to understand how he   had   had the    strength to swim to shore and

 drag   himself  there bleeding.    Close his eyes,     one of the women begged
   crying. Klaios looked toward the sea,   searching for    other survivors. But,     as     always, they were  alone on the island,
    and the open-eyed corpse was all that was    new  between them   and the sea.
